dogs watch us all the time in a way that
no other animal does he senses whenever
we going to go out and he knows before
we even make a move they read our body
language and that's how they know we're
going to take them for a walk before we
think we've made the decision ourselves
it's this constant observation that can
sometimes appear to give them a sixth
sense
Max is a red collie cross normally full
of energy and enthusiasm but in 2008 his
owner maureen burns noticed that
something was wrong I thought at the
time max was fading he was nine and a
half and I was preparing myself for
losing him because of he just wasn't
happy wouldn't come with me wouldn't sit
by me wouldn't sit on my lap and the odd
signs he would come up and touch him a
breast with his nose and back off so
desperately unhappy there's such a sad
look in his eyes
Maureen had a small lump in her breast
but her latest mammogram was clear
so she presumed all was okay initially I
thought just another lumpy breasts as
people get but then I sort of connected
it with the dog with his odd behavior
and one day I was looking in the mirror
in the bedroom here and I looked across
in the mirror at max his eyes he was on
the bed as he is now and I knew it was
cancer Maury went her local hospital but
both a scan and a mammogram came back
negative
it took a surgical biopsy to finally
detect the cancer Maureen had it removed
and the change in Max's behavior was
instant the day I was picked up from the
hospital he was his old hyper self again
he put his nose across my breast to
check where the operation had been and
he was back in his town his eyes were
happy and it was unbelievable the change
in him instant I loved Mac so much and I
owe him so much and even before I go for
a check-up now I get him to check me out
and if he's happy and wagging his tail I
am happy and I know I'm okay we now know
that dogs like max are smelling the tiny
volatile chemicals given off by
cancerous tumors most dogs can do this
they just don't know that we're
interested but with a little training
dogs can accurately pick out a cancerous
patient from a selection of urine
samples they can even be taught to let
diabetics like Steven know that his
blood sugar levels are smelling low long
before he can feel it and definitely
before he passes out dogs like Stevens
are now transforming lives all over the
country they're being trained to detect
the early warning signals for severe
allergic reactions epileptic fits and
narcolepsy